
------------------------------------------

When it comes to illegal steroids, big muscles mean big business. The black market in steroids is estimated at $100 million a year, according to FDA.

But for the athletes who take these drugs to enhance athletic performance and muscular appearance, it's a dangerous business. Steroids can cause numerous side effects, including liver cancer, stroke, and congestive heart failure.

To shut down this black market, four federal agencies have combined their efforts. And their work is paying off.

Joint investigations by the Department of Justice, the FBI, the Customs Service, and FDA recently resulted in a 110-count indictment charging 34 people, including a former Olympic athlete, with a complex conspiracy to make, smuggle and distribute millions of dollars worth of counterfeit steroids.

According to Peter K. Nunez, U.S. attorney for the Southern District of California, in February 1986 British Olympic medalist David Jenkins, who resides in Oceanside, Calif., asked Juan Javier Macklis, a Mexican citizen who owns a pharmaceutical lab in Tijuana, to illegally manufacture the counterfeit steroids. Macklis started producing the counterfeits, using fake labels that indicated the drugs were manufactured by legitimate --or legitimate-sounding-- companies. The indictment, handed down May 21, 1987, charged that Jenkins and Macklis then set up United Pharmaceuticals and, from a Tijuana hotel, solicited business, sold counterfeit drugs, and arranged for them to be smuggled into the United States.

Others indicted were charged with smuggling or distributing the drugs, and sometimes using or threatening violence. James M. Insko Jr. of Santa Monica, Calif., Robert Wantz Jr. of Las Vegas, Nev., and Leonard T. Swirda of Los Angeles tortured and beat a steroid buyer who failed to pay on time, the indictment charges.

Since 1985, federal investigations have resulted in indictments, convictions and the seizure of $7 million in illegal steroids. In one of those convictions, James Bradshaw of Los Angeles was found guilty on 21 felony counts of dispensing human and animal steroids without prescriptions. On Dec. 5, 1986, he was sentenced to six years in prison and was ordered to pay more than $210,000 in fines and penalties. (For more information on the convictions and sentences of other dealers, see "Coming Down Hard on Steroid Pushers' in the November 1986 FDA Consumer.)

Not all of the anabolic steroids--as they are known to doctors--sold on the black market are produced illegally. There are FDA-approved uses for these drugs, including treatment of certain types of breast cancer, anemia caused by kidney failure, and aplastic anemia.

But steroids, which are chemical derivatives of testosterone, a male sex hormone, are potent prescription drugs that can cause a lot of unwanted changes as well.

For men those side effects can include atrophy, or withering, of the testicles, sterility, impotence, and over-aggressiveness. Men may also experience enlargement of the breasts. For women, shrinkage of the breasts can occur, as well as menstrual irregularities, growth of facial hair, and other masculinizing effects. The changes in men are usually reversible if the drugs are used for only a short time. Most of the changes in women are permanent.

In children and teen-agers, the steroids can cause the long bones to fuse prematurely, preventing the child from reaching normal height. In addition, the child can be pushed into early puberty.

The dangers from anabolic steroids are increased when the drugs are used illegally. What is known about the effects of these drugs is generally based on studies of patients receiving therapeutic doses. Athletes not only take as much as 10 times the recommended dose, but they sometimes indulge in a practice called "stacking'--that is, taking more than one drug at a time, both injectable and oral forms. No one knows what these stacked doses are doing to the athletes' bodies.

Many illegal dealers have diverted legal drugs into black market channels. To stop that side of the problem, in mid-1986 FDA notified legitimate manufacturers and distributors of anabolic steroids that they were responsible for improving distribution controls. As a result, black-marketers may be turning more to smuggled foreign steroids and to steroids produced in underground laboratories.

Some of these illegally produced drugs may not even contain the steroids they say they do. In addition, the illegal versions may not be sterile--adding a risk of serious infections to the hazards.

Last Nov. 18, FDA issued an Import Alert that lists some of the unapproved foreign-source steroids that have been found on the domestic black market. The list will help both Customs and FDA inspectors intercept smuggled foreign steroids.

As if the risks from anabolic steroids weren't great enough, some athletes have added another drug to their black market shopping list: human chorionic gonadotropin, or HCG. Made from human placenta, this hormone is approved by FDA to induce ovulation in women and to cause the descent of the testes in young boys.

But a black market version is being sold to athletes to try to counter the enlarged breasts the steroids can cause. However, the illegal product lacks the main ingredient--HCG. In addition, it is not sterile and, therefore, may cause infections and fever.

In June, FDA, working with the Department of Justice, seized a supply of the underground-produced hormone. Because of the risk to ongoing investigations, the agency could not reveal where in the United States the seizure was made. But it said that athletes, coaches and physicians treating athletes throughout the country should watch out for the drug, which is labeled "Pregnyl Chorionic Gonadotropin for Injection, 10,000 units/vial, xxx 10ml Multiple Dose Co-Vial Organon Laboratories, Cambridge, England.'

Of course, stopping the illegal market by arresting the dealers is only half the battle. As long as there are buyers, there will be new dealers to take the places of the ones who are caught. To really stop the problem, athletes must be convinced that the dangers aren't worth whatever extra edge the steroids might give them. This fall, FDA will be sending brochures with warnings about steroids to high schools throughout the country. In addition, the agency is sending those schools 100,000 posters of professional wrestler Jesse Ventura telling athletes "Don't Pump Trouble . . . Stay Away From Steroids.'
